Cytometry for Life

Changing Lives Through Low-Cost Diagnostics 

www.cytometryforlife.org 


What is the Cytometry for Life Program?

	Across Sub-Saharan Africa millions of AIDS (Acquired Immune Deﬁciency Syndrome) victims are desperately in need of antiretroviral treatment. The measurement of the CD4 T-lymphocyte cell levels in the blood of AIDS patients is a critical step that enables AIDS patients to become eligible for therapy. Major gaps exist in the availability of affordable CD4 testing capabilities for the majority of HIV-positive Africans. The Cytometry for Life (C4L) program aims to mitigate this problem by providing low-cost CD4 T-cell testing devices for HIV/AIDS patients in areas plagued by the AIDS epidemic that do not have sufﬁcient access to affordable CD4 testing capabilities. Current costs for CD4 testing range from 10 to 12 USD; we propose to decrease this cost to 0.25 to 0.50 USD per test by using innovatively engineered and robust cytometry devices designed to measure only CD4 levels in terms of absolute count and percentage. Such an initiative is critical since approximately 30 million people are infected in Sub-Saharan Africa and almost 320 million Africans exist in extreme poverty, living on less than $1 a day [1]. Therefore, it is critical that the future of cytometry devices for CD4 measurement in Africa incorporate low-cost options. 

	Why Cytometry for Life? 

		The motivation for Purdue's Cytometry for Life (C4L) program grew out of a call to action by Mr. Stephen Lewis, the UN Secretary General's Special Envoy to HIV/AIDS Relief in Africa, when Mr. Lewis spoke at the 23rd Congress of the International Society for Analytical Cytology (ISAC) in Canada in May, 2006. Mr. Lewis indicated that one major problem (among many) in caring for infected patients in Africa was the lack of low-cost CD4 cell testing technologies.

		Flow cytometers designed for highly industrialized health care environments are the same machines currently being used in developing countries. These instruments are multifaceted and were designed to perform 50 to 100 different tests. In addition to CD4 analysis, such cytometers have the capacity to perform complex multivariate analysis, link to advanced communication systems, and are often fully automated. However, in order to respond to the AIDS crisis across Africa, Cytometry for Life is introducing a new breed of cytometer that only measures CD4 T-lymphocyte levels. In the C4L approach, the cytometer device functionality is targeted to one overarching objective: AIDS epidemic mitigation via CD4 monitoring to facilitate antiretroviral treatment procedures. This targeted single-function approach is the primary means by which Cytometry for Life is able to offer such medical innovation with a signiﬁcantly reduced cost while maintaining the highest standards of quality in terms of the CD4 testing procedure and result generation.

		As HIV/AIDS ravages nations in Africa, Asia, Latin America, and the Caribbean, it is critical that scientists or supporters of international health and development initiatives contribute to the provision of innovative testing capabilities. Such initiatives must respond speciﬁcally to the need for accurate, low-cost CD4 measurement tools that can operate optimally in remote locations, in a timely fashion. 

	[INSET]

		Dr. J. Paul Robinson (left), Cytometry for Life Founder/President of the International Society for Analytical Cytology (ISAC) and Mr. Stephen Lewis (right), the UN Secretary General's Special Envoy to HIV/AIDS Relief in Africa, author of Race Against Time, during the 23rd Congress of the International Society for Analytical Cytology (ISAC), Quebec City, Canada, May 2006.

	The Cytometry for Life CD4 Counting Device 

		The instrument for the Cytometry for Life program is designed solely to measure CD4 levels in absolute count and percentage of T-cells. Cytometer instrument costs and individual test costs are minimized because the machine does not include complex automated ﬂuidics or optics systems. For example, Cytometry for Life has designed an integrated module for the optical and ﬂuidic assembly. The electronics are composed of minimal but very powerful chips. There is no separate computer attached or needed with this technology and therefore it does not require software integration. A USB port has been added to extract data should there be a need to do so. The instrument is low maintenance and does not require highly skilled technicians to operate. The Cytometry for Life CD4 counting instrument is portable and is housed in a small, solid carrying case that includes all necessary reagents and the battery power source. The Cytometry for Life low-cost CD4 testing device is designed to have the capacity to operate in remote, intemperate, and humid regions and not rely on a constant source of electricity.

		Cytometry for Life is collaborating with the Regenstrief Center for Health Care Engineering (RCHCE) and the Center for Advanced Manufacturing (CAM) at Purdue University to ensure that the Cytometry for Life low-cost CD4 testing device design can be manufactured in large quantities, at an economical price.

	[INSET]

		Significance of CD4 cell counts in HIV/AIDS - CD4-positive T-helper cells are a sub-group of lymphocytes (a type of white blood cell or leukocyte). A CD4 count is used to monitor immune-system function in HIV-positive individuals. A declining CD4 T-cell count is associated with progression of HIV infection. In HIV-positive patients, AIDS is officially diagnosed when the count drops below 200 cells/µL. Low CD4 counts in HIV-positive individuals (< 200 cells/µL) is a strong indicator that antiretroviral therapy should be administered.

		Antiretroviral Therapy (ART) refers to the treatment of retroviruses, primarily HIV, through usage of certain therapeutic antiretroviral drugs that act at different stages of the virus life cycle.

	[CAPTION]

		Lewis spoke of CD4 machines -- which measure the number of CD4 immune cells and indicate whether someone with AIDS should be treated -- that are bulky, difficult to use and, at about $50,000 each, vastly out of reach for most of the continent. Apoorva Mandavilli, Nature Medicine volume 12: number 10 , page 1107 October 2006.

	Cytometry for Life Program Approach

		The Cytometry for Life program aims to achieve the following goals in two primary stages:

		Stage 1

			Identify appropriate CD4 device requirements for the African continent.
			Design CD4 measuring devices that are battery operated and computer independent so that they may be easily transported.
			Design a CD4 measuring device that will cost $5,000 USD or less per unit.
			Build these devices to be robust, very easy to use, and yet very high quality.
			Reduce the cost of a single test for CD4 to 0.50 USD or less.

		Stage 2 

			Develop a manufacturing model for widespread distribution and management. 
			Develop a reagent program that supports the instrumentation and functions in remote areas. 
			Partner with manufacturing agents. 
			Link with agencies to facilitate distribution to places of need and to provide long-term maintenance programs.

	[INSET]

		Stephen Lewis challenges cytometrists to produce a low-cost CD4 testing device

		May 2006

			$250,000 gift from Parker Hannifin to Cytometry for Life

		August 2006

			Operational Alpha prototype
			Infusion of additional funding
			Develop reagents

		January 2007

			Ongoing Funding Initiatives

		May 2007

			Five operational Beta prototypes

		August 2007

			Five prototype copies FDA tested

		October 2007

			Begin manufacturing and production of Cytometry for Life CD4 testing devices

	[CAPTION]

		Lewis continues to speak against what he sees as "unconscionable neglect" and "reckless indifference" to AIDS. "I think the global community has responded lamentably," he says, his voice rising. "We're fighting for human lives, what in God's name is wrong with these people?" Apoorva Mandavilli, Nature Medicine, volume 12: number 10, page 1107 October 2006.

	The Importance of Cytometry for HIV/AIDS in Africa

		In Sub-Saharan Africa, there is a great need for antiretroviral therapy. Deﬁciencies in CD4 testing capacity remain a major barrier for the administration of antiretroviral therapy. The guidelines for antiretroviral therapy (ART) from the World Health Organization mandate therapeutic intervention for patients with Stage I or II HIV disease with CD4 cell counts less than 200/µl in Sub-Saharan Africa. This CD4 T-lymphocyte assessment is done by ﬂow cytometry. Unfortunately, ﬂow cytometry is a complex and expensive method in today's high technology-focused world.

		This problem can be solved. Cytometers can be made very inexpensively. With a 40-year history of technological development, cytometry has matured to a point that it can now be simpliﬁed for speciﬁc purposes, such as measurement of CD4 cells. While next-generation ideas are very important and have increased commercial opportunity for westernized healthcare networks, they are not the best solution for the immediate problem of evaluating AIDS patients in Africa today. The complexity of cytometers currently in use drives up the cost for the consumer, limits the number of instruments that can be purchased, and also increases the need for high-cost maintenance and highly skilled operators. Introduction of low-cost, robust, and portable machines through the Cytometry for Life program seeks to close gaps in CD4 testing coverage, particularly in rural African settings which demand innovative solutions in order to best service this target population.

	[INSET]

		Every day in Africa... HIV/AIDS kills about 6,600 people of whom approximately 1,400 are children
		Almost 9,000 more are infected with the HIV virus (http://www.data.org/whyafrica/checkthefacts/)
		"Sub-Saharan Africa has just over 10% of the world's population, but is home to more than 60% of all people infected with HIV/AIDS. In 2005, an estimated 3.2 million people in the region became newly infected, while 2.4 million adults and children died of AIDS." (http://www.unaids.org)

Rural vs Urban: What are the challenges of implenting CD4 testing capabilities in rural Africa?

	UNAIDS estimates that over half the approximately 30 million people living with HIV/AIDS in Sub-Saharan Africa reside in rural areas. Poverty in Africa is particularly onerous in rural areas. More than 70% of the continent's poor people live in rural challenges of implementing CD4 areas. The Cytometry for Life program responds to a testing capabilities in rural Africa? fundamental and urgent need for the introduction of low-cost, robust, and portable CD4 testing devices. UNAIDS estimates that over half the approximately This is especially critical in rural areas where CD4 30 million people living with HIV/AIDS in Sub-testing capacity must still contend with exorbitant Saharan Africa reside in rural areas. Poverty in Africa costs, inaccessibility, and a lack of trained personnel to operate and maintain equipment. While some current cytometry instruments are suitable for urban areas with sufficient infrastructure, rural/remote areas with moderate to poor infrastructure are still urgently in need of affordable, environment-appropriate CD4 testing solutions.

	[INSET]

	High-end options

		Typical high-end flow cytometer used in clinical laboratory to analyze a variety of hematological conditions.
		Cost: $100,000-150,000 USD
		Analysis: Broad spectrum
		Not portable
		High maintenance required
		Highly trained technician needed for operation
		Requires high-level infrastructure

	Mid-Range Options

		Mid-range flow cytometer used to analyze a variety of hematological conditions.
		Cost: $30,000-50,000 USD
		Analysis: Immunological (CD3, CD45, CD8, CD4, etc.)
		Portable
		Moderate maintenance required
		Highly trained technician needed for operation
		Functions in infrastructure-poor areas with sufficient technical support

	The Cytometry for Life "Low-Cost" option 

		Cytometry for Life single-task cytometer for monitoring CD4 levels in AIDS patients
		Cost: $4,000-5,000 USD
		Analysis: Immunological (CD4 only)
		Portable -- enclosed in carrying case
		Low maintenance required
		Minimal training required
		No infrastructure required

	Rural

		Low-throughput technology
		Nominal infrastructure
			unreliable electricity
			no external quality control
		Lack of skilled technologists
		Patients are difficult to contact and follow up

	Urban

		High-throughput technology
		Relatively good infrastructure
			electricity
			filtered water
			external quality control available
			secure laboratory
		A pool of skilled technologists

	History of Cytometry 

		Cytometry is about the measurement of cells and their various environments. In AIDS, a virus takes over a very important cell, the CD4 lymphocyte. The cell is destroyed, the immune system is compromised and eventually, the patient cannot survive. Cytometry is the ﬁeld of science that began approximately 50 years ago with Wallace Coulter's cell counter invention, which is basically an instrument that counts cells or particles. Expansion of the original Coulter blood cell counter resulted in an instrument called the Cell Sorter that could count blood cells as well as sort them according to their physical and chemical characteristics. The Cell Sorter was invented by Mack Fulwyler in 1965. In the 40 years since the invention of the Cell Sorter, a revolution has occurred within the world of immunology, driven primarily by the innovations of Leonard Herzenberg, an immunologist and recipient of the 2006 internationally renowned Kyoto Prize for his signiﬁcant contributions to cytometry. Herzenberg's work catalyzed the maturation of cytometry as a powerful technology in medical research and clinical practice. Present-day expansions of Fulwyler's work, known as Flow Cytometry, are techniques for counting, analyzing, and sorting microscopic particles or cells that have been suspended in reagent or streams of ﬂuid. This technology allows concurrent multiparametric analysis of chemical and/or physical characteristics of single cells ﬂowing through an optical and/or electronic detection apparatus.

		This technology is now used in all kinds of clinical applications that involve hematological abnormalities such as leukemias and lymphomas, as well as monitoring the status of patients with AIDS.

		How does the ﬂow cytometer work?

			A laser beam (the blue line) passes through a ﬂow chamber where a stream of ﬂuid is ﬂowing. Within the stream, the cells are ﬂowing single ﬁle. These cells have different ﬂuorescent labels on them. When a cell with an attached ﬂuorescent molecule passes through the laser beam, photons are emitted. These photons are measured on detectors (see the different colors going out the back of the chamber). Using light scatter signals, it is also possible to determine morphological characteristics (shape, size, etc.) of each cell.

		[INSET]

			This is the key part of a flow cytometer -- you can see cells in the middle stream of fluid -- the blue line shows the laser excitation; where it strikes the cells, a signal is sent out to several detectors that allows us to determine the identity of the cells based on their physical characteristics.
 
The Science of CD4 Testing 

	CD4 testing is a normal practice in the clinical laboratory, and is accomplished through the use of ﬂow cytometry. Flow cytometry is a standard technique used in virtually every hospital and research institution around the world. While ﬂow cytometry techniques are straightforward, they are not necessarily simple, particularly when applied to clinical practice. A great deal of automated technology is employed to gather measurements, analyze data, and produce reports. Consequently, the cost of performing these tests is relatively high. 

	How is a CD4 test performed today? 

		CD4 testing is performed by a ﬂow cytometer. In this process, a small tube of blood cells is treated with a reagent which is speciﬁc to the CD4 lymphocyte (a type of white blood cell).

		The reagents used for identiﬁcation are called monoclonal antibodies (MABs). These antibodies can speciﬁcally attach to a certain type of cell. In this case, the antibody will attach to a CD4 T-cell. Certain molecules (called ﬂuorochromes) are attached to the antibody (such as the green dots below) to aid in the identiﬁcation process.

		When a laser beam is ﬁred at the cells, those cells with the attached molecules emit a signal identifying themselves. This signal is called ﬂuorescence and can easily be measured with sensitive detectors. The colors of ﬂuorescence can also be changed by adding "red" colors to some antibodies and "green" colors to other antibodies. This allows us to make two measurements at the same time. If hundreds or thousands of cells are forced past the laser very quickly, an accurate count can be obtained of all cells that are present.

		CD4 cells are measured in this manner. CD is an acronym for "cluster of differentiation," and that simply means that this molecule can be classiﬁed into a well deﬁned group of cells. In this case, it is cluster of differentiation 4, or a CD4 helper T-lymphocyte cell.

	How are the results interpreted?

		First, the data are collected in the ﬂow cytometer. Each cell is plotted in a histogram display, which is a frequency distribution. In a typical histogram as shown to the right, two peaks appear.

		The ﬁrst peak represents cells that are negative, and thus have no speciﬁc binding to the probe. The second peak represents cells that are "positive" for that particular marker, or monoclonal antibody (MAB). Thus, if this were a CD4 MAB, these cells would be considered CD4+ positive (cluster of differentiation positive). From this histogram we can determine the percentage of cells positive for this MAB.

		Using additional monoclonal antibodies it is possible to classify each type of cell (or subset of cells) present in the blood. In the ﬁeld of cytometry, this is called multiple labeling or multi-color ﬂuorescence, as shown below.

	[INSET]

		Example of how a monoclonal antibody (MAB) binds to specific receptors on lymphocytes -- these antibodies can have colored tags that emit light in specific colors when the tag is excited.

		A multipanel display of monoclonal antibodies (MABs) binding to cells. Each histogram identifies a different cluster of cells in the sample. If we integrate the histogram we can determine exactly how many cells are present in each histogram. 

	Where do the reagents come from?

		The reagents used to identify CD4 cells and other cells types are called monoclonal antibodies (MABs). These MABs are conjugated (labeled) with fluorescent molecules that can easily be identified using a ﬂow cytometer. These MABs require precise and careful manufacturing protocols. They are quite expensive. In many cases, in addition to the cost of the instrument, the cost of reagents contributes greatly to the overall expense of CD4 determination.

	[INSET]

		CD4 Lymphocytes
		CD8 Lymphocytes

		Normal human lymphocytes, T-cells are indistinguishable from other lymphocytes using normal visual or size evaluation. To tell the difference, we must add a monoclonal antibody that binds to a specific receptor on either the CD4 or the CD8 cells. We also add a fluorescent molecule to the antibodies and then use flow cytometry to measure the percentage of each type of lymphocyte present.

	[INSET]

		Estimated percentage of adult population* living with human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV) infection, by country -- worldwide, 2005**

			Source: Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS). 2006 report on the global AIDS epidemic. Geneva, Switzerland: UNAIDS; 2006.
			Available at http://www.unaids.org/en/hiv_data/2006globalreport/default.asp.
			*Aged 15-49
			**The worldwide estimate of the number of persons living with HIV is 38.6 million.

Sponsors 

	The Cytometry for Life program is an extension of the Purdue University Cytometry Laboratories within the Bindley Bioscience Center at Purdue University's Discovery Park. The program is entirely driven to change the lives of people in areas most impacted by HIV/AIDS, particularly on the African continent. 

	Current Major Sponsors

		Purdue University Cytometry Laboratories
		iCyt Visionary Bioscience
		Parker Life Sciences 

	Current Partnerships

		The Cytometry for Life program was initiated by academic and industry experts in the ﬁeld of cytometry who want to make a difference today. Their drive is to create a program that is focused on changing lives through the usage of current-day technology at the most effective level and at the lowest possible cost.

		The Cytometry for Life consortium has already successfully generated over $250,000 in funds. Two funding goals for the program have been set: (1) to raise $1 million to design robust technology and reagents; and (2) to raise another $4 million to deliver the technology across nations in need. This project is entirely driven to mitigate the AIDS epidemic in Africa and respond to the need for low-cost and sustainable CD4 testing capabilities that function efﬁciently within rural African environments with minimal healthcare infrastructure. Cytometry for Life has the potential to positively impact the lives of millions of people in Africa and other nations severely affected by HIV/AIDS.

Participate in the Cytometry for Life Campaign

	What you can do to help?

	The Cytometry for Life program needs your help to achieve the goal of providing inexpensive and life-changing tests for AIDS victims in Africa.

	This program is currently open for sponsorship.

	Your corporate or personal gift will make an important contribution toward directly impacting the lives of millions of AIDS patients who would greatly beneﬁt from affordable and sustainable CD4 measuring capabilities.

	If an individual or organization would like to become a partner or major sponsor of this program, please contact the Cytometry for Life team. We would be happy to visit your institution and give a presentation on the Cytometry for Life program.

	Cytometry for Life is a 501(c)(3) non-proﬁt organization. As such, all donations are tax deductible. Donations can be made to Cytometry for Life at Purdue University. Please contact us for more information.

	Contact Information

		Cytometry for Life Program
		Bindley Bioscience Center
		Purdue University
		1203 West State Street
		West Lafayette, IN 47907
		E-mail: info@cytometryforlife.org
		Toll-Free Phone Number: 1 866-307-8519 

About the Cytometry for Life team

	Cytometry for Life Program Directors
 
		J. Paul Robinson, Ph.D. 
		SVM Professor of Cytomics 
		Professor of Basic Medical Sciences and Biomedical Engineering
		Director, Purdue University Cytometry Laboratories
		President, International Society for Analytical Cytology

		Purdue University
		1203 West State Street
		West Lafayette, IN 47907 
		Phone: 765-494-0757
		E-mail: jpr@cytometryforlife.org
		www.cyto.purdue.edu

		J. Paul Robinson, Ph.D.

			J. Paul Robinson is the SVM Professor of Cytomics in the School of Veterinary Medicine and a professor in the Weldon School of Biomedical Engineering at Purdue University. He received his Ph.D. in Immunopathology from the University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia. He is the director of the Purdue University Cytometry Laboratories and Deputy Director for Cytomics and Imaging in the Bindley Bioscience Center.

			He is the President of the International Society for Analytical Cytology and the Editor-in-Chief of Current Protocols in Cytometry. He is an active researcher with over 110 peer reviewed publications and 20 book chapters, has edited 7 books, and has given over 80 international lectures. He was elected to the College of Fellows of the American Institute for Medical and Biological Engineering in 2004, was the winner of the Pﬁzer Award for Innovative Research in 2004, and the Gamma Sigma Delta Award of Merit Research in 2002.

			His research area has focused on reactive oxygen species, primarily in neutrophils, but more recently in HL-60 cells and other cell lines. His lab is currently studying the biochemical pathways of apoptosis as related to reactive oxygen species in mitochondria. His group has a strong interest in bioengineering, with hardware and software groups developing innovative technologies such as high-speed multispectral cytometry, optical tools for quantitative ﬂuorescence measurement, and advanced classiﬁcation approaches for clinical diagnostics.

		Gary Durack, MS 
		Councilor, International Society for Analytical Cytology (ISAC)
		President and CTO, iCyt Visionary Bioscience

		iCyt Visionary Bioscience
		2100 South Oak Street
		Champaign, IL 61820
		Phone: 217-328-9396
		Fax: 217-328-9692
		E-mail: gdurack@cytometryforlife.org
		www.i-cyt.com

		Gary Durack, MS 

			Gary Durack is the founder, President and Chief Technical Ofﬁcer of iCyt Visionary Bioscience. He also currently holds an appointment with the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign as the Associate Director for Technology in the university's Biotechnology Center. He is the author of numerous publications, has edited a book on advanced technologies, and is recognized internationally as an expert in the ﬁeld of cytometry. He currently serves as a Technical Councilor for the International Society for Analytical Cytology. He received a BS in electrical engineering from Purdue University.

			From 1979 through 1989 he worked for Coulter Electronics Inc. (now Beckman Coulter Inc.). During his tenure at the company, Mr. Durack served as a ﬁeld applications specialist, director of their customer support operations, and manager of the research cytometry instrument development program.

			In 1989 he moved to Purdue University to manage the Purdue University Cytometry Laboratories. In 1993 he was appointed Director of the University of Illinois Biotechnology Center Cytometry Facility. In his seven years as director he secured substantial grant and research contract support to modernize instrumentation and to develop new technologies at the UIUC Cytometry Facility. Among these developments was the ﬁrst DSP-based ﬂow cytometer capable of performing ﬂuorescent lifetime measurement. During this period he collaborated with numerous UIUC faculty, taught a graduate course in ﬂow cytometry, authored several papers, edited a book, and wrote several book chapters.

			Since 2000 he has been engaged in numerous cytometry-related design and development projects for Fortune 500 companies, as well as products now marketed through iCyt Mission Technology. These products include the X-Cyt™ Software for cytometry information management, the Lyt 200™ solid state laser, and the Reﬂection® multi-channel, high-speed cell-sorting system.

		Kathryn L. Beaver, RN, MS 
		Assistant Director of Bindley Bioscience Center 
		Discovery Park 

		Bindley Bioscience Center
		1203 West State Street
		West Lafayette, IN 47907-2057
		Phone: 765.496.1464
		Email: kbeaver@cytometryforlife.org

		Kathryn L. Beaver, RN, MS

			Kathryn L. Beaver is Assistant Director of Bindley Bioscience Center in Discovery Park at Purdue University. With over 20 years of health care program management experience, her most recent management experiences include university-based biotechnology research, in-patient hospital, multi-specialty physician group practice, and social services venues in which Ms. Beaver functioned as a catalyst to implement positive change, ignite new operations, and resolve organizational challenges. She earned an Associate Degree in Nursing and a Master's Degree in Health Promotion and Education from Purdue University, during which time she trained over 1,000 undergraduate and graduate American Red Cross emergency ﬁrst aid students and instructors annually. In 1992, she was awarded an "Excellence in Teaching Award" from Purdue University and received a research award to study emergency providers' response to AIDS/HIV. Publications include journal articles related to AIDS research and emergency care services, as well as teaching manuals for ﬁrst-aid students and instructors. She has worked as a regional specialist for the national American Red Cross, functioned in various clinical nursing roles, and served as a community advisor to Eli Lilly and Company. Currently Ms. Beaver is working toward a Ph.D. in Health Promotion/Disease Prevention, with a research focus on personalized medicine, emerging technologies, and the improvement of health care. 

		Hildred Sarah Rochon, MPH, MS 
		Research Associate, Cytometry for Life Program 

		Purdue University 1203
		West State Street West Lafayette, IN 47907
		Phone: 765-494-0757
		E-mail: hrochon@cytometryforlife.org, hildredrochon04@fulbrightweb.org 

		Hildred Sarah Rochon, MPH, MS 

			Hildred Sarah Rochon holds a Master of Public Health (MPH) degree in International Health Systems Management from Tulane's School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine, a Masters degree in Biology from Indiana University-Purdue University, Indiananapolis, and a BS degree in Public Health, summa cum laude, from Dillard University in New Orleans. She was a 2004-2005 Fulbright Fellow in adolescent reproductive health research and a 2001 University of Michigan Population Fellows Program MSI Intern with John Snow, Inc., both in Madagascar. She also received a University of Michigan mini-grant in 2004 for service in Sénégal, supporting reproductive health/family planning education. She is proﬁcient in French, having studied at the Université de Paris IV-Sorbonne. She held internships with the United States Environmental Protection Agency in Cincinnati, addressing water-borne pathogens, and with the Seattle Biomedical Research Institute for research on African sleeping sickness, speciﬁcally related to Trypanosoma brucei, presenting at IEEE IGARSS in Toronto, Canada. In fall, 2004, she was a research assistant for a cervical cancer project at Purdue University. In March 2006, she facilitated conference organizing and co-authored a presentation at the Global Summit on HIV/AIDS, Traditional Medicine & Indigenous Knowledge held in Accra, Ghana.

		Lova N. Rakotomalala 
		Research Associate, Cytometry for Life Program 

		Purdue University
		1203 West State Street West Lafayette, IN 47907
		Phone: 765-494-0757
		E-mail: lrakotom@cytometryforlife.org 

		Lova N. Rakotomalala

			Lova N. Rakotomalala is a research assistant in the department of Basic Medical Sciences at Purdue University. Born in Nice, France, Lova grew up in Antananarivo, Madagascar. After ﬁnishing high school at lycée Stanislas (Paris, France), he attended Tulane University where he received a BS degree in Cell and Molecular Biology with a minor in Business Management. He also assisted in teaching sustainable development courses at the Payson Center for International Development, including translation of course materials for French-speaking African nations. He is currently completing a Ph.D. investigating the mechanism that leads to liver cancer caused by the hepatitis B virus, utilizing various ﬂow cytometric and cell-imaging approaches.

Footnotes

	1. World Development Indicators 2005, http://devdata.worldbank.org/wdi2005/Section1_1_1.htm